Libertarianism In One Lesson
A forceful one-page essay describing
the essence of the Libertarian idea
and how it can lead to a world of
abundance & harmony.
By David Bergland

LIBERTARIANISM IN ONE LESSON
========================================

     This is a simple summary of what
"Libertarianism" is.  It was originally
written by David Bergland, the 1984
Libertarian Party (LP) presidential
candidate, for distribution during his
campaign.


      LIBERTARIANISM IN ONE LESSON

           by David Bergland

     Perhaps the most common question
put to Libertarian Party (LP) candidates
is:  "What is Libertarianism?"  Or,
"What does the LP stand for?"

     First, let's avoid some common
errors and confusion by stating what
libertarianism is not.  It is NOT a
combination of left and right positions.
It does not fit on the traditional
political spectrum.  That spectrum does
not admit the idea that all people have
the right to control their own lives, in
all respects, and the obligation to take
responsibility for themselves and their
own actions.  Liberals and conservatives
agree that the rest of us are evil or
incompetent or both and must therefore
be controlled by government.  They
differ only on which aspects of our
lives should be controlled most.

     By contrast, Libertarians hold that
each person has the absolute right of
self-ownership over his or her life,
body, speech, action and honestly
acquired property.  Each has the
obligation to respect those same rights
in mutual respect for each other's right
of self-ownership.  Anything that is
peaceful, voluntary and honest violates
no rights and thus is not a proper
subject for governmental intervention.

     Law enforcement's only proper
function is to assist us in defending
our rights.  The only proper laws are
those which penalize such conduct as
murder, rape, kidnaping, robbery,
burglary, arson, trespass, pollution and
fraud.  On an international scale, the
U.S. armed forces should be confined to
providing security against foreign
attack on American shores.  They should
not be used in foreign wars.

     Libertarianism is the philosophy of
the Declaration of Independence and the
American Revolution.  Most people, most
of the time, deal with each other on the
libertarian basis of mutual respect.
Two groups don't:  criminals and
government.  Libertarians challenge the
notion that government can legitimately
coerce the rest of us through taxation,
regulation, conscription and criminal
penalties imposed upon peaceful,
voluntary conduct.  We demand that laws
be limited to their proper functions and
that government personnel be held to the
same standard of respect for our rights
that the rest of us follow.

     The Libertarian Party is for all
people who do not want to be controlled
and who do not want to control others.
On all issues we will support increased
personal liberty and reduced government
control.  We know that a free society is
possible and that it is practical.  We
are committed to work for as long as it
may take to achieve it.

2nd. ed., 2/10/84

