From: Debra Floyd <dfloyd@igc.apc.org>

-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-
    A f r i c a n   A m e r i c a n   N e w s   S e r v i c e
		Deborah K. Floyd, M.A., Publisher
		  Kenneth M. Richards, Editor
		     Anika Collins, Editor
			  -=-=-=-=-
      a service of the Institute for Global Communications
	 PeaceNet * EcoNet * ConflictNet * LaborNet * WomensNet
-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-

		   How to get into Canada                             
								      
Are you looking for the land of milk and honey, where you can have a  
much better life without even working?  Then you are looking for      
CANADA.                                                               
								      
Even if you are just looking for a "Western" country, or want to get  
into the United States of America, Canada is a very easy stepping     
stone to these other countries.                                       
								      
Why Canada?                                                           
								      
Canada has the most generous of all government benefit programs as    
well as being the easiest country to get into in the whole world.     
								      
BENEFITS                                                              
********                                                              
								      
As a refugee or "landed immigrant" in Canada you can not run for      
political office or vote in provincial election, but other than that  
you are legally entitled to more government benefits than do their own
citizens.  (It is a pretty good idea when you do get to the country to
join one of the mainstream political parties, as it will help you in  
the future to get high paying political appointments to various       
government departments and committees.)  You can get free housing,    
free health care, free day-care (for your children,) free education,  
free money, free food, and all levels of government: federal,         
provincial and municipal, will fight each other to see who will give  
you the most.  In addition there are religious organization who will  
give you free help, plus many government funded multicultural (ethnic)
groups who will do everything possible to make your life there as easy
and prosperous as possible.  Ever if you are not a citizen, the       
government will give you money to start your own multicultural        
organization to help other people going to Canada.  If you do get     
government funding to set up such a group, you decide what salary to  
pay yourself, limited only by the size of the government grant.       
								      
If you want a job, any job, you have advantages over many Canadian    
citizens, and more rights than white Canadian males.  The federal     
(Canadian) government and many provinces have Employment Equity Laws  
that set minimum quotas for (ethnic) minorities and women, based upon 
local statistics.  This gives you an advantage in jobs, especially    
management positions, even if you don't have any experience in that   
occupation.  If you are obviously non-white, you are almost guaranteed
a government job, if you want one.  Should you not get a job you want,
not only can you make a complaint with an Employment Equity Commission
you can also go to the provincial and federal Human Rights Commission.
There are also many training programs available free of charge to     
assist you, that are not available to citizens.  The government will  
even give you money to start your own business.                       
								      
Should you decide you don't want to work, but instead receive Welfare 
or Family Benefits, there is no difficulty in doing so.  The more     
children you have (or claim are yours though they might not be) the   
more money you will get.  They are so liberal in their social services
policies, so eager to please, that the administration of these        
programs is set up so that you can easily falsely register as five or 
ten or more people and therefore receive five or ten or more times the
benefits and never get caught.  Many people do this and use the money 
to purchase their own home, or a multiple unit dwelling they can then 
rent out to other newcomers.                                          
								      
The government benefits you receive are highest in the major urban    
areas (and their surrounding areas) such as Vancouver (and Richmond,) 
British Columbia, Toronto (North York, Scarborough, Etobicoke,        
Mississauga and Bramalea,) Ontario, and in Montreal, Province of      
Quebec.  The government encourages newcomers to settle in these areas,
and with the assistance of multicultural (ethnic) organizations, will 
assist you in doing so.                                               
								      
Education is free for your children.  If you get enough people from   
your home country to petition a school to have a "Heritage Language   
Program" the school will be obliged to teach your children your home  
language.  If the school doesn't already have a teacher who knows that
language, they will be obliged to hire one of the parents (or another 
person) who knows that language and can teach it to the children (and 
the language teachers does not need to have any teaching or other     
credentials to do so).                                                
								      
EASE OF ENTRY                                                         
*************                                                         
								      
Of all the countries in the World, Canada is the easiest in which to  
become an immigrant.  Should you wish to get into the U.S.A., get into
Canada first, and then entry into the U.S.A. is easy.  With all the   
benefits due to you upon getting to Canada, the only reason why you   
might not want to live there is their cold winters.  Canada is        
democratic, peaceful, has a very low crime rate, and a relatively     
small police force.  Should you ever get caught for any criminal      
offence, Canada has the most lenient sentences, often just giving you 
a waring, though for serious violent crimes you will likely be sent   
home (at the government's expense).                                   
								      
There are four main methods of entering Canada: illegally, as a       
refugee, as a landed immigrant (permanent resident status), or as a   
citizen.                                                              
								      
Illegally:                                                            
								      
Entering Canada illegally shouldn't be necessary, as they have by far 
the most liberal immigration and refugee entry laws in the whole      
world.  If you do plan to enter illegally because you have not or will
not be accepted any other way, you can visit Canada using a Visitor's 
or Student visa, and then once it is about to run out, you can easily 
disappear in Canada.  Under a student visa you are eligible for free  
health care in most provinces.                                        
								      
Additionally, Canadian documents such as: entry permits, returning    
resident permits, renewal of Minister's permits, immigration visa,    
visitor visas and employment authorizations can easily be purchased.  
There is no need to buy poor quality fake documents, as real          
Government of Canada documents are in wide distribution, worldwide; as
many government workers appear to supplement their salaries by selling
these forms.                                                          
								      
At the present time, it is estimated that out of a population of 27.5 
million peole, 500,000 are in that country illegally.  For political  
reasons, every few years, the Canadian government solves the problem  
of illegal immigrants by granting them all an amnesty; that is during 
these amnesties anybody who is in that country illegally who comes    
forward and admits it automatically gets "landed immigrant" status    
unless they have been caught committing a serious violent criminal    
act.                                                                  
								      
Refugees:                                                             
								      
Every year about 20,000 go to Canada as political refugees.  The      
Canadian Minister of Immigration has announced that figure may rise to
as high as 60,000 a year.                                             
								      
Half of these peole go to Canada sponsored and paid for by the        
Government of Canada.  Most of the rest are sponsored and their       
transporation paid for by refugee organizations; many are church and  
other religious groups, and the others are ethnic organizations.      
								      
The United Nations Convention on Refugees defines a refugee as        
somebody who has reason to fear persecution in their home country     
because of their race, religion, gender, nationality, political       
viewpoint, or membership in a particular social group.  Canada has    
expanded this definition; for instance their Supreme Court has        
included "reproductive freedom" so that a Chinese woman who is        
pregnant with her second child (which is against the law of the       
Peoples' Republic of China, and will result in her being sterilized   
against her will after the birth of that child,) can claim refugee    
status, and Canada's Immigration and Refugee Board (IRB) permits      
political refugee status on the basis of homosexuality.               
								      
Should you be refused entry for reasons such as not meeting the       
medical criterion, you can use these same medical grounds (such as    
having TB or AID's) to claim entry for compassionate and humanitarian 
reasons.                                                              
								      
You should contact a church or other religious organization, or the   
Canadian Embassy or Consulate in your country.  Remember the U.N.     
definition of a Convention Refugee before you give the reason(s) why  
yo may fear for you and your family's lives, and keep your story      
simple so you don't get caught lying.                                 
								      
Once you get to Canada, stay in touch with the organization who       
arranged your entry as they can make sure you get the maximum benefits
your are entitled to in Canada.                                       
								      
Immigration:                                                          
								      
Canada grants over 250,000 people a year "landed immigrant"           
(permanent resident) status.  With only 27.5 million people in their  
country, this is by far, the highest per capita figure in the World.  
								      
You can emmigrate to Canada on several grounds:                       
 - Family Class Sponsorship                                           
 - Entrepreneurs,                                                     
 - Investors,                                                         
 - the self-employed, or as an                                        
 - Independent Applicant.                                             
								      
To enter under the Family Class Sponsorship, your relative who must be
a "landed immigrant" or citizen in Canada, requests of the Canadian   
government, that you join them.  This can easily be taken advantage of
as in many countries there is little provable documentation as to whom
is related to who.  This is the easiest way to emmigrate to Canada.   
								      
Investors and Entrepreneurs typically need to bring a minimum of      
$250,000 with them to Canada.  This money is meant to be invested in  
Canada or to start a business there.  It is common for several people 
to put their money together so as to have over the $250,000 and this  
money is used to get the first person into Canada as an Entrepreneur  
or Investor.  After a year, that money is sent out of Canada, and then
re-enters the country with another "entrepreneur".  Using this method,
the very same money can be used to get several people into Canada over
several years.                                                        
								      
The "self-employed" must prove that they can make a significant       
artistic, cultural or economic contribution to Canada to gain entry.  
To be able to use this criterion, your best bet is to be an "artist"  
or a "writer" and contact an artistic or cultural groups to provide   
you wil a letter to back up your story even if you never really made  
your living this way.                                                 
								      
The second easiest way to get "landed immigrant" status in Canada is  
under the heading of an "Independent Applicant".                      
								      
Canada has a point system to decide your eligibility.  There are      
three methods get into Canada using that system:                      
								      
1 - They give points depending upon your education.  The more         
    education; the more points.  You just have to provide the         
    documents or certificates.  Due to the number of applicants, they 
    almost never verify if your documents are real or forgeries.      
								      
2 - Points are assigned based upon your claimed occupation.  The      
    maximum number of points (almost enough to guarantee your entry,) 
    are awarded if you claim to be a: scientist, computer programmer, 
    engineer or electronic technician.  You should have documents to  
    support your claims.  They do not test you to see if you actually 
    have any knowledge of your claimed specialty, and rarely verify   
    your documents.  Fake engineering degrees and computer programming
    certificates that will almost guarantee your entry are widely     
    available in Asia and most of Eastern Europe.                     
								      
3 - If you have a job guarantee in Canada, your chances of getting    
    into Canada are extremely good.                                   
								      
    There are many employment agencies throughout the World and       
    Canada that will arrange jobs in any occupation in Canada.  If you
    are female there is a very high demand for "domestic helpers"     
    (housekeepers and nannies).  Check for ads in your country's      
    newpaper's or ethnic newspapers from Canada.                      
								      
    Even if there isn't a job waiting for you in Canada, for a price, 
    most of these companies will provide you with fake documentation  
    saying there is a guaranteed job waiting for you in Canada, and   
    you can use this documentation to get into the country.           
								      
    Warning: It is best to get a personal recommendation from somebody
    who has successfully gotten to Canada, as to the reputation of the
    employment agency.  A few agencies have been known to abuse their 
    applicants and send them to Canada to be prostitutes.             
								      
Citizenship:                                                          
								      
Normally it takes at least three years of living in Canada to become a
citizen of that country.  There are two ways to instantly become a    
citizen: marry a Canadian citizen, or be born in Canada.              
								      
Many countries have marriage bureaus.  Usually they bring together    
women from their home country with Canadian men.  (A few will also    
introduce men to Canadian women.)  It is your right to find the       
richest man you can, to marry.  If you marry him and stay married for 
at least 6 months, even if you then get divorced, you get to keep your
Canadian citizenship.  Additionally, if you actually marry the        
Canadian man and then divorce him for a good reason, you will likely  
get one-half of all his assets (businesses, family home, other        
property, cars, etc.).  If you want half of his assets, it is best to 
create a record of repeated physical abuse, whether or not any has    
occured.  To do this contact any women's groups after 4 or 5 months of
marriage, to complain of physical abuse, to establish a record of     
your first complaints.  In the sixth month or later, hit or otherwise 
injure yourself so that you will have at least bruising and call      
the Police and say your husband has beaten you.  You will then do     
the same a second time, but first call the women's shelter and then   
the Police.  This second time, ask the Police to drive you to the     
women's shelter on the grounds that you fear for your life.  The      
shelter will get you a place to live and get you a free lawyer to help
you divorce your Canadian husband and claim half of all his assets.   
Feminist groups will also greatly assist you.  You will now not only  
be a Canadian citizen, but also be rich!                              
								      
Another way to get into Canada is to be a parent of a Canadian.  It is
common for a pregnant woman to get a visitor's visa to visit Canada,  
but to time the visit to be around the date of the birth.  If the     
child is born in Canada, it is automatically a Canadian citizen.      
Having a child who is a Canadian citizen greatly increases the chance 
for the woman to be given "landed immigrant" status.  Once the woman  
is a landed immigrant, she can now sponsor her husband and other      
members of her family to come to Canada.                              
								      
With all its benefits, Canada is the greatest place to emmigrate to!  
								      
.
