                  "GIVING THE LIE TO THE CHRISTIAN RIGHTWING" 

              Howdy, gang!  It's time for another radical-subversive, smutty, 
leftwing upload from that old electronic anarchist, Sax Allen, coming to you 
very much alive from Free San Francisco!

              In recent weeks, the Reagan/Nixon stacked Supreme Court has 
abandoned law and precedent in favor of extreme rightwing ideology and the 
Heritage Foundation agenda.  They've begun dismantling the progressive changes 
for which we all fought so hard and long.  They're sabotaging and undermining 
important gains in civil rights, abortion, search and seizure, privacy and 
separation of church and state.

              Because these rightwing noodle heads are so fond of making up 
their own "factoids" and because they're currently pumping out a bunch of 
malarkey about America supposedly being a "Christian" nation, and because as 
proof of this they're making up religious lies about some of our most 
intelligent presidents...for all these reasons I thought you'd enjoy hearing a 
few hot words from our founding fathers themselves.  Note in particular what 
George Washington says!
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
              The American Revolution of 1776 was to a large degree led by men 
steeped in the rational humanism of the Enlightenment who considered all 
established religion a form of barbaric superstition.  Thus their insistence on 
the separation of church and state, which was universally regarded as the MOST 
RADICAL aspect of the American Revolution.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                THOMAS JEFFERSON:

              "Millions of innocent men, women and children, since the 
introduction of Christianity, have been burnt, tortured, fined, imprisoned:  
yet we have not advanced one inch towards uniformity.  What has been the effect 
of coercion?  To make one half the world fools, and the other half hypocrites.  
To suport roguery and error all over the earth."
                             -- "Notes on the State of Virginia"  (1781-82)

              "...the priests indeed have heretofore thought proper to ascribe 
to me religious, or rather anti-religious sentiments, of their own fabric, but 
such as soothed their resentments against the act of Virginia for establishing 
religious freedom.  They wished him to be thought atheist, deist, or devil, who 
could advocate freedom from their religious dictations.  But I have ever 
thought religion a concern purely between our God and our consciences, for 
which we were accountable to him, and not to the priests."
                             -- Letter to Mrs. Harrison Smith (6 August 1816)


                                   JOHN ADAMS:

              "Eight millions of Jews hope for a Messiah more powerful and 
glorious than Moses, David, or Solomon;  who is to make them as powerful as he 
pleases.  Some hundreds of millions of Mussulmans [Moslems] expect another 
prophet more powerful than Mahomet [Mohammed], who is to spread Islamism over 
the whole earth.  Hundreds of millions of Christians expect and hope for a 
millennium in which Jesus is to reign for a thousand years over the whole world 
before it is burnt up.  The Hindoos [Hindus] expect another and final 
incarnation of Vishnu, who is to do great and wonderful things, I know not 
what.  All these hopes are founded on real or pretended revelation....  
              You and I hope for splendid improvements in human society, and 
vast amelioration in the condition of mankind.  Our faith may be supposed by 
more rational arguments than any of the former."
                             -- Letter to Thomas Jefferson (24 September 1821)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

              "The Bible is not my book, nor Christianity my profession."
                                            -- Abraham Lincoln


              "The government of the United States is in no sense founded on 
the Christian religion."
                                            -- George Washington


              "Religion is excellent stuff for keeping common people quiet."
                                            -- Napoleon


              "When a man is freed of religion, he has a better chance to live 
a normal and wholesome life."
                                            -- Sigmund Freud
, he has a better chance to live 
a 
 
 
 
 
 


X-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-X

 Another file downloaded from:                               NIRVANAnet(tm)

 & the Temple of the Screaming Electron   Jeff Hunter          510-935-5845
 Salted Slug Systems                      Strange              408-454-9368
 Burn This Flag                           Zardoz               408-363-9766
 realitycheck                             Poindexter Fortran   415-567-7043
 Lies Unlimited                           Mick Freen           415-583-4102
 Tomorrow's 0rder of Magnitude            Finger_Man           408-961-9315
 My Dog Bit Jesus                         Suzanne D'Fault      510-658-8078

   Specializing in conversations, obscure information, high explosives,
       arcane knowledge, political extremism, diversive sexuality,
       insane speculation, and wild rumours. ALL-TEXT BBS SYSTEMS.

  Full access for first-time callers.  We don't want to know who you are,
   where you live, or what your phone number is. We are not Big Brother.

                          "Raw Data for Raw Nerves"

X-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-X
