From: Joel @Skousen

10 Packs for Survival

INTRODUCTION

     This booklet was prepared to provide you with the essential minimums
for survival preparations. While it is not exhaustive in coverage, it is
complete as to the needs of most people. Before adding long lists of your
personal extra needs, try calculating the cost of these bare essentials.
You will be amazed at the high cost of contingency preparations. This is
not intended to discourage you, but rather, to help you realistically
determine your future financial priorities so as to ensure you have bought
the essentials before adding the sophisticated extras. After you have
acquired about half of the recommended items, you will become aware of a
critical lack of storage space within your home--if it is designed like
most American houses. To assist you in planning for a more self-sufficient
residence we have also included a brief summary of the concepts outlined
in the 500 page SURVIVAL Home Manual. If you desire to pursue the subject
in more detail, we suggest you order the manual direct from our
Architectural offices using the order form at the end to the booklet.

PHILOSOPHY AND DESIGN CRITERIA OF THE SURVIVAL HOME

     Survival architecture is the unique design combination (in the proper
proportion) of facilities, materials, supplies, equipment, knowledge and
skill exactly matching a correct analysis of what shortages and crises we
will face in the future. In achieving this purpose I make reference to the
fact that "survival means more than solar" to emphasize the need to avoid
becoming too involved with only one aspect of self-sufficiency at the
expense of the others. This error in proper perspective has become the most
common mistake in the entire craze for self-sufficiency. With each new
product devised, a corresponding marketing slogan usually appears
describing "how you can become totally self-sufficient" with their product.
The potential severity of future crises, however, seems to dictate that no
one product brings total self-sufficiency. It seems most probable in the
final analysis that no set of products or facilities, no matter how
complete,brings anything but temporary self-sufficiency for a lone
individual.

     There are a variety of terms and definitions floating around in the
"self-sufficiency" arena--one of the least understood pertains to "survival
and "retreat" philosophy. "Self-sufficiency" as a term is well accepted and
enjoys frequent use among the entire social strata, whereas "survival"
intimates "gloom and doom". However, under more   careful scrutiny, it
becomes obvious that "survival" and "self-sufficiency" are nearly
synonymous. In actuality, the purpose of self-sufficiency is to SURVIVE
various crises where one is in competition with others for scarce
resources: ie, food and fuel shortages, dwindling finances, or social
unrest, etc.

     There is a significant difference between the general term "survival"
and its child, the "retreat" philosophy, which is an ultimate reaction at
the limits of the self-sufficiency concept.

WHY SELF - SUFFICIENCY?

     Many subscribe to the view that most of our future economic woes and
commodity shortages will be government induced through bureaucratic
mismanagement and excessive regulation. So, you say, the responsibility
will simply fall back on ourselves, where it rightly belongs. However, this
view overlooks our prime and ever-increasing social weakness; that our
society has become so specialized in its occupational endeavors, we no
longer have the will or skills to revert rapidly to a generalists society
with each providing his own essential skills and services. Thus, we
encounter the real reason for the craze for self-sufficiency: the inner
need to become confident in our ability to provide for ourselves and our
family should a minor or major crisis or shortage arise. The motive to save
a few heating dollars is perhaps primary with many who may purchase a wood
stove, but it soon becomes obvious to most woodburners that wood heat is
only a small portion of their total self-sufficiency needs.

     In fact, when you tally all the other additional self-sufficiency
needs such as water, waste disposal, electricity, storage space, tools, and
security, you suddenly realize that you have come face to face with the
word "survival", which is the word that, in essence, reflects "ultimate
self-sufficiency".

EVERYTHING INVOLVES A PRIORITY CHOICE.

     While the survival retreat concept gets all the headlines in the hard
money newsletters, its share of actual dollars invested is insignificant.
From my experience as the architect most often involved in survival
housing, the majority of client energy and funds are devoted to residential
upgrade and preparation within the bounds of suburban or semi-rural living.
Why? Frankly because very few people have the time, money or inclination
to separate themselves completely from society even though they believe
that difficult economic and social problems will be forthcoming.

     100% rural self-sufficiency is almost impossible to achieve on
anything more than a hermit level. Even then it is either all-time
consuming or inordinately expensive and probably both.

     In the final analysis then, everything in the survival and
self-sufficiency field is a compromise or trade off of one lesser asset for
another more important to you. If you want isolation to have security, then
you usually sacrifice social ties, time and gasoline in commuting, and
maybe electricity, telephone, and leadership opportunities.

     There are ways of overcoming these compromises--if you have enough
money, additional manpower and equipment; but you may become so
sophisticated that you aren't self-sufficient any more. No two individuals
or families should utilize the same self-sufficiency plans.

HERE ARE THE ESSENTIAL STEPS

     l. Begin reading non-governmental analyses of the state of the nation.
        Specifically: political, Economic, social, military, and moral  
        trends. Reading recommendations include:
          PERSONAL FINANCE newsletter 
          901 N. Washington St. suite 605,                              
          Alexandria, Va 22314

          Gary North's REMNANT REVIEW. 
          P. O. BOX 39800, 
          Phoenix, AZ 85069

     2. Analyze the condition of your local state and community as to long
        term survivability in a crisis:
          Most favorable criteria are:
          a. low population density (50 people per sq. mile or less)
          b. High level of religious, moral character.
          c. Lack of highly unionized heavy industry, or welfare populous.
          d. Strong local autonomy with little attachment to federal funds.
          e. Diversified economy with an agricultural base.

     3. Make a series of decisions based upon your national and local
     assessment as what problems you most likely will encounter. Note: You
     cannot come to a proper design of a self-sufficient or survival
     residence unless you have determined what shortages, crises, or
     threats you face. The better your research, the more accurate your
     predictions will be.

     4. Read the SURVIVAL HOME MANUAL and study the essentials of survival
     residential design to determine what your present home lacks and what
     is available in new or remodeled survival construction.

     5. Determine, financially and security wise, whether you should remain
     in your present home and remodel, move and build or buy a more
     suitable home. Consider job, and/or commuting time. It is imperative
     that you do not destroy your income producing ability unless you have
     other means or opportunities to turn to which will survive most
     economic downturns. Don't be tricked into thinking you can go "live
     off the land". The capital required for machinery and non-growable
     necessities will require substantial monthly income.

     6. Start saving and begin a monthly procurement plan for acquiring the
     items listed in the 10 packs for survival. Do it each month--don't
     wait for enough money to accumulate for a one time purchase of
     everything--it may not be readily available then.

     The foregoing introductory material is essential in order to
appreciate the following survival design criteria. The quantity of
preparedness features I will describe may not be necessary in every case,
depending on the relative security of the location you choose to live in.
Remember, the more self-sufficient and secure the area in which you live,
the less it costs you to prepare for personal survival,,

PRIMARY FAULTS OF CONVENTIONAL HOUSING

     The following are the six essential liabilities of the conventional
residential structure:

     1. Lack of security (fire, intrusion, vandalism)
     2. Poor resistance to heat, cold, wind, and sun.
     3. Lack of storage facilities (food, dry goods, machinery etc).
     4. Poor floor plan efficiency (costly wasted space, lack of emergency
        accommodations)
     5. Single source of heat for space heating, water heating, ,@Ind     
        cooking.
     6. Single source of water and electrical power.

DESIGN CRITERIA

     In my actual design work, the most common concern expressed by the
wife of a client is that the home not look like a fortress or a bunker.
This is not only possible but preferable. There is no benefit in becoming
a known target for resentment during hard times. The best survival
residences are designed to look completely conventional both inside and
out, so that you may stay within the bounds of society without appearing
as an extremist and encouraging undue resentment.

     The properly designed survival residence has within its walls and
private recesses all the equipment and design technology that allows you
to maintain a nearly normal lifestyle throughout a crisis. This is
extremely important to the family man who must maintain his income during
hard times. He cannot afford to take time off from work to heat hot water
over a camp stove during an electrical outage or stand guard over his house
day and night when major civil disturbances occur.

     The following are some of the major design features of a survival
residence:

     l. Independent well water and/or water storage facilities integral  
        with the home.
     2. Multi-fuel furnace (burns at least three different fuels)
     3. Reserve or standby electrical power.
     4. Multi-fuel cooking facilities, and water heating equipment
     5. Secure walls, doors, and windows with intrusion monitoring      
        equipment.
     6. Superior energy-conserving structural design utilizing solar and
        underground design where possible.
     7. Secret and semi-private storage facilities which include a fallout
        shelter.
     8. Maintenance and repair facilities with appropriate tools.
     9. Greenhouse and other food production facilities
     10. Internal communications equipment.

     If you are questioning the potential costliness of a full survival
residence, consider this: it is not intended to discourage you from acting
due to lack of sufficient funds, but rather to show you the importance of
ordering your financial priorities In order to start preparing in the most
critical areas first. In all cases, never place all of your available funds
into one, or even two areas at the exclusion of all others.

     If, in the final analysis, you find that not all of your
self-sufficiency preparations were utilized, you will have at least spent
many a restful night with the assurance that you have done everything
within your ability to prepare you and your family for realistic potential
difficulties.

     Both those who wish to relocate permanently and those who may simply
desire to construct a vacation retreat cabin elsewhere will need some
guidance as to the best areas for security: We have made available to our
clients the most comprehensive security map covering the entire United
States, both as to the most dangerous areas and the most secure areas. It
represents many years of research and analysis and may be ordered direct
from the architectural and planning division using the order form at the
end of this booklet.

FOOD PACK

     200 LBS/PERSON, HARD WINTER WHEAT
     50 LBS/PERSON,RICE
     50 LBS/PERSON, BEANS
     10 LBS/PERSON, HONEY
     25 LBS/PERSON, POWDERED MILK(non-instant type)
     6-months supply NORMAL CANNED GOODS AND BOTTLED FRUIT

     1-large bottle 1000mg VITAMIN C 1-large bottle MULTIPLE VITAMIN 
     2-CLOVE GARLIC (nature's anti-biotic) (keep refrigerated)

     4-#10 can/person dehydrated fruits and vegetables (use for variety-not
       for bulk)
     SALT, PEPPER, SPICES
     OIL (keep refrigerated)

WATER PACK

     1- portable WATER WASHER filtering kit
          (from AMERICAN WATER PURIFICATION CO.
          1990 @Olivera Rd. Concord, Ca 94520)
     1/person WATER STRAW individual filter straw (from American Water  
       @Purif.)
     1-PACK SCIENTIFIC FILTER PAPER (cone) (12v diameter papers)
     1/person 10 GALLON GLASS DISTILLED WATER BOTTLE. (date and seal with
       stopper and tape. Wrap on bottom and sides with dense foam carpet
       pad to protect against earthquake or jarring.
     1-Bottle HALAZONE TABS. or regular CHLORINE BLEACH for water        
       purification.

POWER PACK

     1-MOBILE, SELF-CONTAINED 3KW 120/220V GENERATOR (DIESEL OR         
       GASOLINE/GAS) with one month fuel supply in portable tanks
     1-12 volt AUTO BATTERY with carry strap trickle charger, and jumper
       cables and 12V light attachment.
     1-100 ft. 4-PLUG HEAVY DUTY EXTENSION CORD with built in light bulb
       (rough duty rated) in a "cage".
     2-HAND-OPERATED FLASHLIGHTS (item #605-771w695 from US GENERAL catalog
       100 General Place, @Jerico N.Y. 11753)
     2-NICAD FLASHLIGHTS (item # 852-5350W US GENERAL catalog)
     1-long range POLICE-TYPE FLASHLIGHT with extra bulbs.
     SUPPLY OF NICAD BATTERIES with CHARGER: 
          8-"D" CELL 
          4-"C" CELL 
          16-"AA" CELL 
          2-9V TRANSISTOR TYPE.

@MED PACK

     BLOOD PRESSURE GAUGE (electronic)
     STETHOSCOPE 
     BANDAGE SCISSORS 
     LONG TWEEZERS 
     2-LOCKING FORCEPS (1-curved point) 
     DISPOSABLE SCALPELS 
     THERMOMETER (ORAL AND RECTAL)
     INFLATABLE SPLINTS 
     BANDAGES elastic, self adhesive 
          Band-aids 
          large compress type with straps. 
     SUTURES (dissolvable) 
     cotton backed ADHESIVE TAPE 
     GAUZE 
     ALOE VERA BURN OINTMENT 
     ANTI-BIOTIC OINTMENT 
     ASPIRIN 
     RUBBING ALCOHOL 
     IPECAC SYRUP (to induce vomiting) 
     CONTAINER OF STERILE WATER (1 qt) 
     CLEAN ABSORBENT COTTON RAGS 
     SOAP (liquid) 
     Long Stemmed cotton swabs

TRANSPORTATION PACK

     1/person: 10 speed BICYCLE with heavy. duty tires, rack and carriers.
       lights
     1 emergency VEHICLE (recommend VW VANAGAN with trailer hitch, locking
       gas cap, and camper options. Install bike racks front and rear, and
       extra 30 gallon gas tank. Carry oil cans two flashlights
     EMERGENCY TOOL KIT: extra fan belts, metric wrenches and sockets, oil
       filter, air filter fuel filter, spark plugs, points, condenser,  
       fuses, light bulbs, head light, tire pump, aerosol tire repair   
       sealer, Jumper cables, tow cable w/hooks.
     INFLATABLE RAFT (4 man) with paddles.
     1-250cc MOTORCYCLE equipped for road and off road use. Add equipment
       and extra fuel tank carriers.

TRAVEL PACK

(THESE ITEMS SHOULD BE PACKED IN PORTABLE "DUFFLE BAGS" READY TO GO)

     1-qt WATER per person 
     2-"energy bars" per person 
     DEHYDRATED FOOD PACK for one week dried fruit, vegetables, meat flour,
        oil, salt, pepper, spices vitamins, honey,peanut butter crackers,
        protein powder, powder milk 
     collapsible 5 ga. WATER CONTAINERS 
     "WATER WASHER" FILTER 
     lightweight COOK KIT large pot, dishes, spoons, forks knives, cups,
        non-stick skillet spatula, can opener, large spoon 
     TOWELS 
     2-water proof nylon tarps 
     CHANGE OF CLOTHES FOR EACH PERSON 
     COATS, 
     1-thermal blanket 
     1-SLEEPING BAG / person 
     MATCHES, FIRE STARTER 
     COMPASS, MAPS of areas of intended use 
     2-RECHARGEABLE FLASHLIGHTS 
     12v TROUBLE LIGHT w/@cig. liter plug 
     FIRST AID KIT 
     TOILET PAPER, soap
     1-Pocket knife 
     1-FISHING KIT 
     1-large BOWIE KNIFE (western cutlery) (perfectly weighted to serve as
       both fire knife and hatchet etc) 
     1-small portable mt. climber's stove 
     1-back pack with frame 
     paper, pencil 
     signaling Mirror
     1-manual flashlight 
     WHISTLE , PORTABLE CABLE SAW 
     small bottle of bleach, Insect Repellent.
     MAGNIFYING GLASS 
     100 ft. 1/2 dia. GOLDLINE ROPE,
     2 pulleys
     50 ft. nylon "shroudline" cord 
     .22 caliber pistol w/ 500 @rds. ammo.

COMMUNICATIONS PACK

     MULTI-BAND RECEIVER/SCANNER
     1-CITIZENS BAND TRANSCEIVER
     2- 3 CHANNEL PORTABLE TRANSCEIVERS rechargeable batteries
     PORTABLE POWER PACK, ANTENNAS
     1-SMALL PORTABLE TELEVISION (battery operated)

EQUIPMENT PACK

     1-GRIND ALL Grinder(for wheat, corn beans, peas, nuts etc.)      
       RAM PRODUCTS 765 So. University Ave. Provo, Ut. 84601     
     1-GRAIN COUNTRY bread mixer. FOOD SCIENCE @CORP. 95 NO. 200 E.      
       American Fork, Ut 84003
     1- @VICTORIO STRAINER (@Vitantonio Corp @Willoughby, Ohio 44090)
     1-Hand operated CAN OPENER
     1-STEAM CANNER with canning bottles w/Lids and rings for two seasons
     CUTLERY: high quality KNIVES-
          a. peeler/filet knife 
          b. pairing knife (short small) 
          c. long Slicing knife.
     1-portable ELECTRIC ICEBOX 12V.
          @KOOLATRON industries limited
          56 Harvester Ave. Batavia N.Y. 14020
     Kerosene LAMP/HEATER by ALADDIN
     TWO BURNER KEROSENE OR PROPANE STOVE with one month fuel supply
     HAND OPERATED CLOTHES WRINGER.
     TREADLE SEWING MACHINE or treadle attachment for your electric     
        machine.
     PORTABLE ELECTRIC HOT PLATE
     FIRE EXTINGUISHER (portable)

DEFENSE PACK

     .22 cal.PISTOL (9-shot revolver or 15 shot Auto) w/ 1000 rds. ammo.
     .22 cal. RIFLE w/1000 rds. ammo.
      45 cal. auto PISTOL w/ 100 rds. am~o.
     .223 RIFLE (Mini14 by RUGER) w/ 500 rds. ammo.
     2- canisters of AEROSOL MACE
     1-POCKET KNIFE 1- BOWIE KNIFE

TOOL PACK

     1- 250 amp PORTABLE ARC WELDER
     PELLETIZED OXY-ACETYLENE TORCH
     PROPANE TORCH w/SPARK LIGHTER
     SOLDER/FLUX (electrical and non)
     ALLEN WRENCH SET
     NUT DRIVER SET
     TAP & DIE SET (national course,fine)
     SOCKET SET & RATCHET HANDLE, @EXTENS.
     CHANNEL LOCK PLIERS
     2-ADJUSTABLE "CRESCENT" WRENCHES
     NEEDLE NOSE PLIERS WITH WIRE CUT.
     VISE GRIP PLIERS WITH NARROW JAW
     METAL CHISEL
     WOOD CHISEL SET
     METAL PUNCH/DRIFT
     TIN SNIPS
     CLAW HAMMER
     SMALL, LARGE SCREWDRIVERS
     SMALL, LARGE PHILLIPS SCREWDRIVERS
     HAND OPERATED TWIST DRILL
     AUGER EXPANSION BIT WITH BRACE
     HACK SAW
     BOW SAW
     HANDSAW (10 PT TEETH)
     LARGE PRY BAR/WRECKING BAR
     AX
     HATCHET
     SMALL BLOCK AND TACKLE or 'come-a-long" hand operated winch. 
     GLUE assorted 
     NAILS, NUTS, BOLTS, SCREWS 
     electric MULTI METER,    
     110 circuit test light BARTER ITEMS

BARTER

   These items generally meet all of the following criteria for Barter

l. High consumer demand
2. Not easily home manufactured
3. Durable in storage
4. Divisible in small quantities
5. Authenticity easily recognizable

     LIQUID DETERGENT, LAUNDRY
     DETERGENT
     RUBBING ALCOHOL, BLEACH
     TOOTHBRUSHES
     RAZOR BLADES   
     TOILET PAPER
     ALUMINUM FOIL
     WRITING PAPER, TYPING PAPER,
     PENS,
     PENCILS, ERASERS
     SHOELACES, STRING, CORD, ROPE
     FISHING LINE
     INSECT REPELLENT, WATER
     REPELLENT
     PAINT, VARNISH
     MATCHES
     WATCHES
     TAPE
     LIGHT BULBS
     NEEDLES, THREAD, ZIPPERS, BUTTONS
     ASPIRIN, VITAMINS, OTHER DRUGS
     SEEDS, GRAIN, SUGAR,
     COFFEE, LIQUOR, CIGARETTES
     ANTI-BIOTICS, BURN OINTMENTS
     SAFETY PINS
     MANUAL CAN OPENER
     KNIVES
     CANNING JARS, LIDS, RINGS 
     SHOES, BOOTS, SOCKS, NYLON
     STOCKINGS 
     UNDERWEAR, WINTER CLOTHES
     COATS 
     BLANKETS
     HAND GUNS, RIFLES,AMMUNITION
     FUELS (ALL TYPES)
     QUARTS OF MULTI-VIS MOTOR OIL
     ANTI-FREEZE
     WIRE
     GLUES
     BOLTS, SCREWS, NAILS

