TOPIC: LIFE OF CHARLES MANSON

	Charles Milles Manson was born on November 12,1934. His
birthday was later changed to the eleventh because it is Armistice day
and was easier to remember. Charles was born in Cinncinatti, Ohio and
was the son of a sixteen year old prostitute named Kathle en Madox. She
married a man, William Manson just long enough to provide a last name
for her son. While Charles was growing up his mother was frequently in
and out of prison. During the times she was in prison he stayed with
his aunt who thought all things to be sins butt still gave him enough
love to survive.  he was only eight years old. Up until the age of
twelve he lived a life of run down hotel rooms and new "uncles" with
whom his mother drank heavily. In 1947 he was placed in a foster home
and he kep t running away from them only to steal, return to his mother
and to return to his firends homes. most of the times he ran away he
was caught only to be sent into a school for delinquints and was in and
out of institutions for a while. He was finally sent  to jail on
October 24, 1951 and he turned seventeen that november. He displayed
great behavior but less than a months time before being paroled he held
a razor blade against another boys throught while sodomizing him. On
may 8, 1954 he was granted parole  and he was 19. Charles had spent 17
years, almost half his life, in prison by the age of 32. While in
prison he claimed the religion of scientology which is based upon  the
book dianetics by L. Ron Hubbard. While in prison it is said that he
obtained the  title Theta-Clear and that is te highest title and when
obtained you are one with the universe, at peace with nature. Finally
he got out of prison and he started what would become his family. he
starte3d by pimping women and then collecting more and more  people off
the streets. Charles had picked up some male members too and they were
only kept around because they attracted women. after a while they moved
to sphan ranch in california and when that happened Charlie told about
Helter Skelter which would be  an all out war between the blacks and
whites. He felt that the blacks would come out triumphant and he would
be in a hole in the desert and then ol blackie would come to him and he
would say "what do i do now i don't know how to rule the world?" and
Charl ie would take his "familt with him out of the hole and they would
rule the world. I'ts strange that he got the word Helter Skelter for it
ariginated in England  and means a slide. well then he started killing
and when he was done it was estimated at about 30-40 people dead due to
his family and then he went on trial and he was scentenced and is on
death row if you want to write to him his adress is :

	CHARLES MANSON
	CA MEDICAL FACILTIY
	VACAVILLE, CA 95688
	




X-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-X
 Another file downloaded from:                     The NIRVANAnet(tm) Seven

 & the Temple of the Screaming Electron   Taipan Enigma        510/935-5845
 Burn This Flag                           Zardoz               408/363-9766
 realitycheck                             Poindexter Fortran   510/527-1662
 Lies Unlimited                           Mick Freen           801/278-2699
 The New Dork Sublime                     Biffnix              415/864-DORK
 The Shrine                               Rif Raf              206/794-6674
 Planet Mirth                             Simon Jester         510/786-6560

                          "Raw Data for Raw Nerves"
X-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-X
