Suveillance Conference Overview

COPYRIGHT (C) 1991 BY FULL DISCLOSURE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.

The National Technical Investigators Association (NATIA) held their 5th 
annual conference in San Antonio, Texas, August 26th-31th.

Participation in the conference was 600 attendees up from 500 last year. 
However, there was a conspicuous lack of people from the military 
intelligence community.

As usual with government related electronic surveillance operations, 
techniques, equipment, etc, secrecy prevails. Due to efforts by Full 
Disclosure, the San Antonio area media was informed about the show. They, 
however, were all turned away at the gate. The result being no local press 
coverage occured.

NATIA is an organization of over 2300 supervisory law enforcement officers, 
communications and security managers assigned to support technical 
investigative activities in the major federal, state and local enforcement 
and intelligence agencies.

The NATIA membership is responsible for supplying all of the various 
communications, audio, video, photographic, specialized electronic systems 
and investigative aids used in support of these sensitive bugging, 
wiretapping and intelligence activities.

The annual conference is used by manufactures of spy equipment to introduce 
their new wares and sell more of the old stuff and for members to learn all 
the newest tricks, scams and techniques.

Consequently, NATIA and its membership has a sigificant role in domestic 
spying activities. NATIA's role not only includes the equipment, but 
standards, operations, techniques, tricks, and the like. Such activities are 
purportely regulated and overseen by the public, through Congress, by the 
political process.

Any effective oversight or regulation requires information; information that 
NATIA desires to suppress from the American public. The First Amendment, 
however, assures that the public will be informed. Full Disclosure was able 
to obtain many documents at the show and the essential information content 
will be presented in this and future issues. Articles based upon show 
information will be indiciated as such.

The desire to suppress this information is so great, that due to Full 
Disclosure's publication of the 1989 NATIA conference exhibitors directory, 
there was no directory made for 1990. (The essential information content from 
the show schedule is presented below).

Not only was NATIA furious over the publication of the exhibitors directory, 
but also over the fact that several hundred copies of the issue with the 
directory were distributed on the show floor. 

What was the atmosphere of show? At night, some members, partied like 
motorcycle gang members. During the day, however, it was strictly business. 
The following is an overview of the technical and management seminars that 
were held. Contact addresses have been provided by Full Disclosure and were 
not a part of NATIA literature.

``Future Telephone Technology'' by Bruce Becker, Central Telephone. Telephone 
technology is rapidly changing. With new systems, features and technologies 
on the way. This class will discuss what's on the horizon in the telephone 
industry.

``Law Enforcement and FCC Rules and Regulations'' by Arlan Van Doorn, FCC, 
Deputy Chief, Field Operations (202) 632-7200. Find out what the rules are. 
What's new, what's changed, what's the same. Is that video transmitter you're 
using legal? [Ed note: if not, does the exclusionary rule or fruit of a 
poisonous tree doctrine apply?]

``2.4Ghz Video Transmission'' by Michael McDowell, Florida Department of Law 
Enforcement. The FCC has recently allocated State and Local Law Enforcement 
Agencies frequencies for low power video transmission. Learn what equipment 
is available and how to put together a 2.4 Ghz video transmission system with 
off the shelf parts.

``Countermeasures: Technical Surveillance Counter Measures'' By Clyde Widrig, 
Los Angeles, Police Department. What is being found during TSCM sweeps? Learn 
about this, the basics of doing a sweep, and what equipment you will need.

``Telephone Technology Panel'' The panel will discuss the impact on law 
enforcement of new technologies (ISDN, CLASS, Etc.), systems and features, 
coming soon to a telephone near you. Discussion will include the need for 
NATIA to help set standards for intercept equipment.

``Covert Entry Planning'' by Jim Moss, U.S. Customs, 40 S Gay St, #424, 
Baltimore, MD 21202. Covert entry planning offers the agent valuable tips on 
setting up the mechanics, legal, and security aspects of surreptitious 
entries. This class could mean the difference between a successful entry and 
a possible tragedy.

``Digital Recording And Audio Processing'' By Attila Mathie, Adaptive Digital 
Systems. An audio recorder with no moving parts? See it and get the latest 
information on digital recording and audio processing.

``Managing Technical Operations'' by Anthony Bocchiccio, Drug Enforcement 
Administration. Aimed at the management, this class is intended to give you 
the knowledge of what it takes to run a technical section. Instruction will 
include managing resources, personnel, and equipment.

``R-F Spread Spectrum Techniques'' by Stan Causey, DC Metro Police. Spread 
Spectrum transmission is an area of rapid development. With many new systems 
either in the works or already here, this class will bring you up to date.

``Seizing Personal Computers and Data Recovery'' by Ken Scales, IRS, Criminal 
Investigative Division. Everywhere you look today there are PC's (personal 
computers). What do you do when you seize one? Just turning it on may cost 
you some very valuable data. Learn what to do, not to do, and who to contact 
for help.

``Member Equipment and Technique Exchange Forum'' Do you have any new ideas, 
tips, techniques, tricks or equipment? This is the place to bring them. Share 
all of this valuable information with your fellow members in this open forum.

``Video Operations'' By Jack Tuckish, Naval Investigative Service. How to get 
the most from your covert video operations. This class will teach packaging 
techniques, camera placements, tips, tricks, etc.

``Night Vision Critique.'' Instruction will be given in interfacing night 
vision equipment to 35mm and video cameras. Additionally you will learn about 
specifications, uses and limitations of the different types of night vision 
equipment. If available slides taken at the night vision demo will be shown.

``Computer Crimes.'' By Frank Milligan, IRS. People are gaining illegal 
access to computer data bases, bank accounts, etc. Who are these hackers, how 
are they getting in, and what can be done to stop them.

``Asset Seizure And Property Management.'' By Richard Harris, California, 
Department of Justice. Is there more to Asset Seizure than property, weapons 
and cash? This class will offer an overview on asset seizure and focus on 
seizing equipment that can be used to aid law enforcement. Items such as 
computers, communications gear and alarm equipment are being seized and used.

The above is reprinted from Full Disclosure Newspaper. Subscribe today and 
get interesting articles like the above, plus more... pictures, graphics, 
advertisement, and more articles. Full Disclosure is your source for 
information on the leading edge of surveillance technology. Print the 
following form, or supply the information on a plain piece of paper:

----

Please start my subscription to Full Disclosure for:

[ ] Sample issue, $2.00

[ ] 12 issue subscription, $18.00

[ ] 24 issue subscription, $29.95
     With 24 issue susbcription include free one of the following:
         [ ] Directory of Electronic Surveillance Equipment Suppliers
         [ ] Citizen's Guide on How to Use the Freedom of Info/Privacy Acts
         [ ] Maximizing PC Performance

Also available separately:

[ ] Directory of Electronic Surveillance Equipment Suppliers, $6.00

[ ] Citizen's Guide on How to Use the Freedom of Info/Privacy Acts, $5.00

[ ] Maximizing PC Performance, $6.00

    Illinois residences, add 6.5% sales tax on above 3 items.

Enclosed is payment in the form of:

[ ] Check/Money order, [ ] Visa, [ ] Mastercard

Card no:___________________________________ Exp date:_______

Signature:__________________________________________________

Phone:______________________________________________________
(required for credit card orders)

My name/address:

Name:_______________________________________________________

Street:_____________________________________________________

City/State/Zip:_____________________________________________

Return to: Full Disclosure, Box 903, Libertyville, Illinois 60048



