                     SPY PLANE USED AT WACO

	The Islander was conceived in the early 1960s by the original
Britten-Norman company founded by John Britten and Desmond Norman,
in an effort to produce a very simple, light twin-engined transport
for third-level and commuter airlines.  The company had a 25 per
cent interest in Cameroon Air Transport and the BN-2, as the new
twin was designated, was designed specifically to meet the needs
of that company, which was regarded as typical of many through t
the world which needed an aircraft with 6-10 seats, good take-off
performance, low purchase cost, low operating costs and easy
maintenance.  Featuring a high-mounted, untapered and strutted
wing, fixed landing gear and unusual 'wall-to-wall' seating in the
fuselage, with three access doors (two to port and one to
starboard), the BN-2 prototype was powered by a pair of 210hp
(157kW) Continental IO-360-B engines and flew on 13 June 1865. 
With a span of 45ft (13.7m) and gross weight of 4,750lb (2,155kg),
it was later fitted with 260hp (194kW) Lycoming )-540-E engines,
with which it flew on 17 December 1965, the span then being
increased to 49ft (14.9m) and gross weight to 5,700lb (2,585kg). 
A production prototype to similar specification flew on 20 August
1966.  After it had encountered financial difficulties in 1972, the
Britten-Norman company was acquired by the Fairey Group, but the
latter also went into receivership in 1977, whereafter the Britten-
Norman designs and facilities at Bembridge in the Isle of Wight
were acquired by Pilatus, part of the Swiss Oerlikon-B hrle
manufacturing group.
 

VARIANTS

	The first production standard of Islander, as the BN-2, was
similar to the prototype in its modified form, the first aircraft
flying on 24 April 1967.  In June 1969, the production standard
became the BN-2A, with a number of product improvements, a further
change to BN-2B being made in 1978 with higher landing weight and
improved interior design.  Both the BN-2A and BN-2B were made
available in a number of subvariants, the most significant options
being [one line missing] flown on 30 April 1970): Riley-Rajay
superchargers on standard O-540 engines; extended-span wing tips
containing extra fuel tankage; and a long-nosed BN-2S with two more
seats in the cabin, replacing baggage stowage space that was
provided, instead, in the nose (first flown 22 August 1972).  A
series of suffix numbers added to the Bn-2A and BN-2B designations
indicated these and other options, such as revised wing leading-
edge camber to meet US certification requirements, drooped flaps
for better single-engined climb, and (the -20 series) a higher
gross weight.  On 6 April 1977, the BN-2A-40 prototype flew with
600shp (448kW) Lycoming LTP [one line missing] Islander.  The BN-
2T prototype first flew on 2 August 1950 and many of the previously
described options are also available on this model.  Specifically
military versions are known as Defenders.


SERVICE USE

	The BN-2 Islander received British certification on 10 August
1967 and first deliveries were made on 13 and 15 August
respectively, to Glosair and Loganair.  FAA approval on 19 December
1967 was followed by first deliveries to the USA in January 1968. 
The BN-2T Turbine Islander obtained UK certification in May 1981
and US approval (to FAR Pt 23) on 15 July 1982.


[Box}
SPECIFICATION
(BN-2T Turbine Islander)

Power Plant: Two Allison 250-B17C turboprops each rated at 400shp
(298kW) thermal capacity and flat-rated at 320 shp (238.5kW) with
Hartzell three-blade constant-speed, fully-feathering propellers
of 6ft 8in (2.03m) diameter.  Fuel capacity, standard, 108 Imp gal
(492l).

Performance:  MAx operating speed, 152kts (315km/h) at 10,000ft
(3,050m) and 154kts (285km/h) at sea level; cruising speed at 72
per cent power, 150kts (278km/h) at 10,000ft (3,050m) and 142kts
(283km/h) at 5,000ft (1,525m); Initial rate of climb, 1,050 ft/min
(5.3m/sec); service ceiling, over 25,000ft (7,620m); take-off
distance to 50ft (15.2m), 1,250ft (380m); landing distance from
50ft (15.2m), 1,115ft (340m); range with max payload, no reserves,
141 naut mls (261km); range with max fuel, IFR reservers, 590 naut
mls.

Weights:  Empty equipped weight, 4,040lb (1,832kg); max payload,
2,454lb (1,113kg); payload with max fuel, 1,340lb (608kg); max
take-off weight, 7,000lb (3,175kg); max landing weight, 6,800lb
(3,084kg); max zero-fuel weight, 6,200lb (2,857kg).

Dimensions:  Span, standard tips, 49ft 0in (14.9m) or, extended
tips with fuel tankage 53ft 0in (16.15m); overall length, standard
nose, 35ft 7 3/4 in (10.87m) or, with weather radar nose, 36ft 3
3/4 in (11.07m); overall height, 13ft 8 3/4in (4.18m); sweepback,
nil; wing area, standard tips, 325.0 sq ft (30.19sq m) or, with
extended tips, 337.0sq ft (31.31 sq m).

Accommodation:  Cabin length, 10ft 0in (3.05m), max width 3 ft 7in
(1.09m); max height, 4ft 2in (1.27m).  Accommodation for up to 10
occupants (including pilot), on two individual side-by-side seats
and four bench-type seats, with no aisle.  Access to seat row
through individual doors.  Up to 49cu ft (1.39 cu m) of baggage
volume, plus optional nose compartment with 22 cu ft (0.62cu m)
capacity; maximum cabin freight capacity (no passenger seats), 166
cu ft (4.70cu m).
