[BBS file "VSIPEMP1.TXT"; "Employee's Guide to Buyouts" dated April
7, 1994.]
=================================================================

                 THE EMPLOYEE'S GUIDE TO BUYOUTS

               U.S. OFFICE OF PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT
             FEDERAL WORKFORCE RESTRUCTURING OFFICE

Version: APRIL 7, 1994 

           FEDERAL WORKFORCE RESTRUCTURING ACT OF 1994
               PUBLIC LAW 103-226, March 30, 1994

KEY FEATURES OF INCENTIVES PROGRAM

       To avoid or minimize involuntary separations due to
restructuring, executive branch agencies may pay voluntary
separation incentive payments (VSIP) in any designated component,
occupation, grade, series, and/or location to employees who
voluntarily agree to resign, retire, or take voluntary early
retirement (OPM must approve the agency's request for early
retirement).  The agency may allow employees to take buyouts
through March 31, 1995.

       Employees may be offered an incentive only if the agency
utilizes the VSIP program.  The agency will then notify employees
when they will have the opportunity to take the incentive. 
Agencies do not have to get approval from OPM to offer VSIPs.

To receive a VSIP offer, an employee must--

-be serving under appointment without time limit,
-have 12 months of continuous service,
-not be a reemployed annuitant,
-not be eligible for disability retirement,
-agree to resign or retire voluntarily during a period designated
by the agency, and
-be in a position designated by the agency as eligible for VSIP
offers.

       VSIPs are not available to employees separated by reduction
in force (RIF).

       The law sets no grade, series, or age requirements for VSIP. 
Agencies may offer incentives to all eligible employees of the
agency or only to employees in designated:

-organizational units,
-geographic locations, 
-occupational categories (including grade levels), or
-any combination of these factors,

but may not select individual employees on any personal basis
either to receive incentives or to be excluded from receiving
incentives.

       The VSIP amount is the lesser of $25,000 or an amount equal
to the employee's severance pay entitlement.  We have attached a
worksheet for employees to use to estimate the amount of their
VSIP.  The VSIP is also subject to all applicable federal, state,
and local taxes, social security, medicare, etc. 

       The agency may delay employee separations up to March 31,
1997, to ensure performance of the agency's mission.

       An employee must repay the full VSIP if employed by the
Government of the United States, by appointment or personal
services contract, within 5 years after separation.  This provision
applies to employees of the Department of Defense and the Central
Intelligence Agency who take VSIPs on or after March 30, 1994.

      -OPM may waive repayment only in cases where an individual
with unique abilities is the only qualified candidate for
appointment to a position.

       Employees must apply for separation incentive payments and
must sign an agreement that the decision to resign or retire under
these circumstances is entirely voluntary.  The application process
and the order in which applicants are selected to receive VSIPs is
determined by each agency.  Employees will need to contact the
servicing personnel office for details.

       If an employee is selected to receive the voluntary
separation incentive payment, these agreements will serve as a
commitment to resign or retire during the window period.  If
employees are not selected to receive a separation incentive, they
will not be bound by this commitment. 


[BBS Note-Guide continues on next page.]

















FREQUENTLY ASKED "BUYOUT" QUESTIONS (AND ANSWERS)



1.    "WHAT ARE VOLUNTARY SEPARATION INCENTIVE PAYMENTS?  WHY ARE
FEDERAL AGENCIES OFFERING THEM?"

The Administration is committed to reducing the size of the Federal
workforce.  On March 30, 1994, the President signed Public Law
103-226, the Federal Workforce Restructuring Act of 1994.  This
law allows agencies to offer Voluntary Separation Incentive
Payments, (VSIPs or "buyouts") of up to $25,000 to employees who
resign or retire.  These payments are lump sum cash bonuses given
to employees who voluntarily leave Federal service.  By allowing
employees to volunteer to leave the Government, agencies can
minimize or avoid firing employees through the use of costly and
disruptive reductions in force (RIFs).  The cost of separating an
employee by RIF is far greater than the cost to pay employees VSIPs
to voluntarily quit.


2.    "WHEN WILL MY AGENCY OFFER BUYOUTS?"

The Federal Workforce Restructuring Act of 1994 authorizes the
heads of Executive Branch agencies to pay voluntary separation
incentives (buyouts) to eligible employees who resign or retire by
March 31, 1995.  Since the agency head is authorized to determine
where and when to allow VSIPS, only YOUR agency can tell you where
and when buyouts will be offered.  OPM CANNOT ANSWER THIS QUESTION
FOR YOU.


3.    "DO I MEET THE AGE AND SERVICE REQUIREMENTS TO BE ELIGIBLE
FOR A BUYOUT?"

The law does not set any age or service requirements.  However, the
law does allow agencies to limit where they use incentives. 
Incentives can be targeted at positions in locations,
organizations, and/or occupations (including grade levels), but may
not be targeted at individuals.

Many people believe that the "buyout" program is a RETIREMENT
program.  It is not.  It is a program that allows federal agencies
to pay separation incentives (buyouts) to ANY employee who
quits or takes regular or early retirement.  If your agency elects
to offer buyouts to you, you will be eligible--regardless of age or
length of service.  If you wish to retire, you must meet the age
and service requirements for retirement (see question 9).


4.    "MY AGENCY IS NOT PLANNING TO USE BUYOUTS.  IS THIS FAIR? 
DON'T I HAVE A RIGHT TO A BUYOUT?"

Agencies ARE NOT REQUIRED to use or pay incentives.  Incentives ARE
NOT an employee right.  The incentives are a management tool to
help the agency reduce the workforce without having to run
costly and disruptive RIFs.

5.    "HOW MUCH WILL MY INCENTIVE BE?  DOES EVERYONE GET $25,000?"

The amount of each employee's incentive will vary.  The basic
formula for calculating your incentive is the same formula used for
calculating severance pay.  Remember, the MAXIMUM amount that any
employee can receive is $25,000, (the amount you receive will be
EVEN LOWER after the appropriate taxes, social security, medicare,
etc. are deducted by your payroll office).  You will need
to contact your servicing personnel office for an exact calculation
of your incentive amount.  However, we have included a worksheet in
this packet to help you ESTIMATE your buyout.

An incentive payment is the amount of severance pay you would get,
or $25,000, whichever is less.  Severance pay is figured as if you
would get it; you don't have to be eligible for severance pay. 
(Severance pay is normally only for people who separate
involuntarily.  Leaving Federal service with an incentive payment
is a voluntary action.)  

The amount of severance pay would be 1 week's basic pay for each of
the first 10 years of your civilian service, plus 2 weeks' basic
pay for each year over 10 years.  An age adjustment allowance
of 10% is added for each year you are over 40.  (No credit is given
for military service unless the service interrupted otherwise
creditable civilian service.)


6.    "WHAT MAKES AN EMPLOYEE ELIGIBLE FOR A BUYOUT?"

To receive a VSIP offer, an employee must--

-be serving under appointment without time limit,
-have 12 months of continuous service,
-not be a reemployed annuitant,
-not be eligible for disability retirement,
-agree to resign or retire voluntarily during a period designated
by the agency, and
-be in a position designated by the agency as eligible for VSIP
offers.



7.    "ARE POSTAL SERVICE EMPLOYEES COVERED BY THIS LAW?"

No.  The law specifically excludes U.S. Postal Service and Postal
Rate Commission employees.




8.    "ARE D.C. GOVERNMENT WORKERS WHO WERE FEDERAL EMPLOYEES
COVERED BY THIS LAW?"

No.  This law authorizes Federal agencies in the Executive branch
to pay incentives to their employees.  The DC Government is not a
Federal agency.

9.    "DOES THE NEW LAW CHANGE ELIGIBILITY FOR RETIREMENT?"

No.  If you are under FERS or CSRS, you can take regular optional
retirement if you are 55 with at least 30 years of service; age 60
with 20 years of service; or age 62 with 5 years.  If your agency
offers early retirement, you must be at least 50 with 20 years of
service or have 25 years of service at any age.  An employee under
FERS also is eligible for an immediate annuity if he/she has 10
years of service and has reached the minimum retirement age (55 if
born before 1948, and gradually increasing to 57).  An employee
under CSRS must meet the 1-out-of-last-2 years coverage
requirement and all employees must have at least 5 years of
civilian service.


10.   "WHAT DOES AN "APPOINTMENT WITHOUT TIME LIMITATION" MEAN?"

An employee on an appointment with a time limit works only until a
specified date and then goes off the rolls.  The employing agency
sets the ending date when it hires the individual and/or when it
extends the appointment.  For example, temporary and term employees
serve with a time limit, so they are not eligible for an incentive
payment.  Career and career-conditional employees and permanent
employees in the excepted service have no limit so they are
eligible.   


11.   "I RETIRED FROM THE MILITARY BUT AM NOW A CIVILIAN EMPLOYEE. 
CAN I APPLY FOR A SEPARATION INCENTIVE?"

Yes, if you are otherwise eligible.  The agency will figure the
incentive payment only on the basis of your civilian service.


12.   "WHEN IS THE EARLIEST I CAN LEAVE WITH AN INCENTIVE PAYMENT? 
WHEN IS THE LATEST?"

Your agency can set windows for buyouts at any time through March
31, 1995.  The agency may also delay your separation with an
incentive payment to no later than March 31, 1997, if your job is
essential for continuing operations.  See your personnel office for
details on when windows will be available for you to apply.


13.   "IF I MEET ALL THE REQUIREMENTS, DO I AUTOMATICALLY GET AN
INCENTIVE PAYMENT IF I LEAVE?   WHAT IF MY AGENCY GETS MORE
REQUESTS FOR INCENTIVE PAYMENTS THAN ARE NECESSARY TO MEET ITS
REDUCED STAFFING TARGETS.  HOW WILL IT DECIDE WHICH REQUESTS TO
APPROVE?"

You are eligible to apply for an incentive payment if you meet all
the requirements set by the law and your agency.  Agencies may
exclude certain jobs or units from the incentive payment offer.
(See your agency for a list.)  In handling applications, the agency
must use a fair and objective method to determine the order in
which applications will be approved (for example, order of
separation date, order of receipt of completed applications,
seniority, etc.).

14.   "WHEN WILL I RECEIVE MY INCENTIVE PAYMENT?  WILL IT BE ALL AT
ONCE (LUMP SUM) OR MONTHLY?  IS IT TAXABLE?"

The agency will send you the incentive payment as soon as possible
after the date of your separation but cannot guarantee a specific
date.  First, the agency must resolve any leave errors, salary
offsets, and employee debts to the Government.  It is also subject
to garnishment for alimony and child support.  The incentive
payment is taxable.  You will receive it as a lump sum (less
Federal income tax withholding, applicable State and local taxes,
and FICA/Medicare taxes).  


15.   "DO I HAVE TO MAKE A COMMITMENT TO LEAVE IF I ACCEPT AN
INCENTIVE PAYMENT?"

Yes.  Your agency will ask you to sign an agreement saying that in
exchange for an incentive payment you agree to resign or retire on
a specific date.  If employees could change their minds, the agency
might not be able to meet its downsizing goal.


16.   "WHAT DOES THE INCENTIVE PAYMENT AGREEMENT SAY?"

The agreement says that you agree to leave by a certain date in
return for the incentive payment.  It also says that if you accept
an incentive payment, you will not be eligible for reemployment
with the Federal government, in either a temporary or permanent
status, or on a personal services contract for 5 years following
the effective date of your separation--unless you repay the full
amount of the incentive payment.  Waivers are allowed only in rare
cases.


17.   "WHAT RIGHTS AND BENEFITS WOULD I BE GIVING UP TO TAKE AN
INCENTIVE PAYMENT TO RETIRE OR RESIGN RATHER THAN WAITING TO BE
SEPARATED IN A RIF?"

o    Placement assistance;
o    Taking a job in Government within next 5 years without paying
back the incentive payment;
o    Full amount of severance pay (if eligible);
o    Discontinued Service Retirement (if eligible); and the option
of a lump-sum refund of retirement contributions (available to
employees separated involuntarily through September 29, 1994).


18.   "MAY I TAKE A DISCONTINUED SERVICE RETIREMENT, THE LUMP-SUM
REFUND OF RETIREMENT CONTRIBUTIONS, AND AN INCENTIVE PAYMENT?"

No.  Incentives are paid to employees who leave voluntarily. 
Discontinued Service Retirement is based on an involuntary
separation.  The lump-sum refund is available only to employees who
have a critical medical condition or are separated involuntarily no
later than September 29, 1994.


19.   "IF I LEAVE WITH AN INCENTIVE PAYMENT, CAN I TAKE A JOB IN
ANOTHER FEDERAL AGENCY?  AM I ELIGIBLE FOR PLACEMENT ASSISTANCE?"


If you retire or resign with an incentive payment, you may not take
a job with the Federal government for 5 years following the day of
your separation--unless you pay back the full amount of
the incentive payment.  This prohibition covers any kind of
employment (for example, permanent, temporary, expert, consultant,
reemployed annuitant) as well as personal services contracts. 
Repayment may be waived but only in those rare cases where an
individual is the only qualified applicant for a job and the agency
head requests the waiver from OPM.  If OPM waives the repayment and
you are reemployed, you may not move out of that position--unless
you repay the incentive payment or unless OPM approves another
waiver.

You are not entitled to placement assistance because employees
volunteer to leave Federal service with an incentive payment. 
Placement assistance is for employees who are involuntarily
separated.


20.   "CAN THE AGENCY DELAY MY SEPARATION UNTIL AFTER THE "WINDOW"
AND STILL GIVE ME AN INCENTIVE PAYMENT WHEN I LEAVE?"

Generally, to receive an incentive payment, the effective date of
your resignation or retirement must be during the agency's window
period.  However, the agency may extend individuals in certain
positions or whole groups of positions for any period up through
March 31, 1997, to ensure the performance of the agency's mission.


21.   "HOW WILL THE AGENCY DECIDE WHICH EMPLOYEES TO DELAY?"

Each agency can set its own policy on which positions they will
need to ensure the agency's mission.  Check with your personnel
office to find out how your agency will be handling the option.

22.   "CAN I TURN DOWN MY AGENCY'S REQUEST THAT I STAY ON FOR AN
ADDITIONAL PERIOD AND LEAVE NOW AND STILL GET THE INCENTIVE
PAYMENT?"

Agencies may approve the incentive payment for certain employees
contingent on their staying to finish essential activities.  These
activities must be to ensure the agency's mission.  If you are such
an employee, you could still resign at any time, or take early
retirement during the early retirement window, or take regular
retirement if you are eligible, but you may not get the incentive
payment if you left before the date the agency set.


23.   "LEAVING FEDERAL SERVICE WITH THE INCENTIVE PAYMENT IS
SUPPOSED TO BE VOLUNTARY.  IF I'M ELIGIBLE BUT DON'T CHOOSE TO
LEAVE, CAN MY AGENCY RETALIATE BY MOVING ME TO ANOTHER POSITION?"

Incentives are for voluntary separations.  Coercion is prohibited. 
However, after the window closes, an agency may find it necessary
to move some remaining employees to other positions.  Also, later
restructuring could mean the agency would have to reassign or even
separate employees.  To take these actions agencies would have to
follow requirements of law, regulation, and applicable negotiated
procedures.


24.   "IF I DECLINE AN OFFER OF AN INCENTIVE, CAN I BE RIFed?"

Coercing an employee to take a buyout is prohibited.  However, even
if an agency uses buyouts, it is possible that buyouts will not
result in a sufficient number of voluntary separations and the
agency may need to carry out a RIF.  A buyout offer does not
protect the employee from RIF. 





















VOLUNTARY EARLY RETIREMENT

1.    "WHO IS ELIGIBLE FOR EARLY RETIREMENT?"

OPM can authorize an agency to offer early retirement to eligible
employees.  The agency can exclude employees in certain jobs that
are critical to the agency's operation.  (See your agency for a
list.)  The agency may change this list before the early retirement
window closes. Unless you are excluded because your job is on the
above list, you are eligible for early retirement as follows:

o    If you are under the Civil Service Retirement System (CSRS),
you must have served in a position covered by the CSRS for at least
l year out of the 2 years immediately before retirement.   

o    If you are under FERS, this rule does not apply.  At least 5
years must be civilian service, whether you are retiring under CSRS
or FERS.

o    You must be at least 50 with 20 years of service or have 25
years of service at any age.  

o    You must be serving under other than a temporary appointment;

o    You must have been on the agency's rolls at least 30 days
before the agency requested authority from OPM and you served
continuously since that date without a break in service.


2.    "WHAT DOES THE EARLY RETIREMENT "WINDOW" MEAN?"

Each agency sets a window, or period of time, during which eligible
employees can take early retirement.  Normally, this coincides with
the window during which buyouts will be offered.  If you want to
retire early, you would separate during the agency's window.  You
must turn in your application as soon as possible to make sure you
can retire during the window.  If your agency offers you an
incentive payment contingent on your staying beyond the window to
finish essential work, you do not have to retire during the window,
but you must apply during the window period.


3.    "CAN ANYONE WHO IS ELIGIBLE AND WHO APPLIES FOR EARLY
RETIREMENT BE ASSURED OF RETIRING EARLY?"

Just as it does with buyouts, the agency may set a limit on the
number of early retirements it offers.  This number should take
care of all the employees who want to retire early and whose jobs
are not essential to the agency's continued operations.  If the
agency receives more applications than it needs, the agency must
use a fair objective method to make decisions (for example, order
of separation date, order of receipt of completed applications,
seniority, etc.).

4.    "IF I TAKE EARLY RETIREMENT, IS MY ANNUITY REDUCED?"

CSRS employees who retire under the voluntary early retirement
authority will have a reduction in their annuity of 2 percent per
year for each year they are under age 55.  (The reduction is 1/6 of
1 percent for each full month.)  This is a permanent reduction in
annuity.

Employees with only FERS service will not have their annuities
reduced unless retiring under the MRA+10 provision before age 62. 
Employees with both CSRS and FERS service will have a reduction
only for the CSRS portion of their service.

Special rules apply to the calculation of annuities of employees
who have part-time service after 1986.  The personnel office can
give you more details.


5.    "IF I TAKE EARLY RETIREMENT, WHAT HAPPENS TO MY UNUSED SICK
LEAVE?"

CSRS employees will receive service credit for any unused sick
leave in determining their annuity (but they must meet eligibility
requirements for retirement before the sick leave is added.)  

FERS employees do not receive credit.  Employees who were
previously under CSRS but who transferred to FERS will receive
credit for either the amount of sick leave at the time of the
transfer to FERS, or at the time of retirement--whichever is less. 


6.    "CAN I CONTINUE HEALTH AND LIFE INSURANCE INTO RETIREMENT?"

If you retire on an immediate annuity and if you have been enrolled
(or covered as a family member) in a plan (not necessarily the same
plan) under the Federal Employees Health Benefits program from (a)
the 5 years of service immediately preceding retirement, or (b)
from service since your first opportunity to enroll or, ( c)
continuously for the full period or periods of service beginning
with the enrollment which became effective no later than December
31, 1964.  Also, your annuity must be sufficient to cover your
share of the premiums.


7.    "WHAT FORMS DO I NEED TO APPLY FOR EARLY RETIREMENT WITH AN
INCENTIVE PAYMENT AND WHERE DO I GET THEM?

Your personnel office will provide these forms to you.  You will
sign:  (1) an application for retirement, and (2) an incentive
payment agreement.

[BBS Note-Guide continues on next page.]


VSIP COMPUTATION WORKSHEETS-

The following are samples for use in ESTIMATING the amount of your
buyout.  The actual calculation formula is quite complicated and
technical.  The samples are intended to allow an employee to figure
the approximate amount of the buyout they may receive.  OPM is not
responsible for the accuracy of the results that this worksheet may
give you.  If you want a more accurate calculation, you will have
to contact your personnel office.
EXAMPLE OF VSIP COMPUTATION WORKSHEET


line 1.Salary at time of separation (GS-14/10)= $73,619

line 2.Weekly Rate (line 1 divided by 52)=$1,415.75

line 3.Years of Service (see A and B below)18

      A.   If your length of service is LESS THAN 10 years, enter
your length of service on line 3a.

      B.   If your length of service is MORE THAN 10 years:
        1)  enter your length of service:                 18
        2)  subtract 10 from your length of service:   -  10
                                                       =   8
        3)  multiply the result, in this case, 8, by 2: = 16
                                                         +10
        4)  add 10 to the amount listed in 3).   26
        5)  enter this total on line 3a. This is the factor for
your adjusted years of service and tells you approximately the
number of weeks of severance pay you would be entitled to.

line 3a.   Adjusted Years of Service                      26

line 4.Basic Severance Pay (multiply amount in line 2 by number on
line 3a--Adjusted Years of Service)             =  $36809.50

line 5.Age Adjustment Factor (if your age is above 40, look your
age up on the "AGE TABLE AND FACTORS" chart attached.  Enter the
"factor" number shown.)

           Age = 52 years.  Factor = 2.20.

Line 6.    Severance Pay Amount

           Multiply line 4 by line 5 factor (38809.50 X 2.20) =   
                                                  $80,980.90

           6a.  If line 6 exceeds line 1, enter amount on line 1.
           The amount of severance pay will be =       73,619

Line 7.    Buyout Amount

           If line 6a exceeds $25,000, enter $25,000
OR 
           If line 6a does not exceed $25,000, but is more than
line 1, enter amount on line 1.

                 YOUR BUYOUT AMOUNT:  =              $25,000

[BBS Note-Guide continues on next page.]


VSIP COMPUTATION WORKSHEET


line 1.Salary at time of separation         =_________

line 2.Weekly Rate (line 1 divided by 52)   =_________

line 3.Years of Service (see A and B below)  _________

      A.   If your length of service is LESS THAN 10 years, enter
your length of service on line 3a.

      B.   If your length of service is MORE THAN 10 years:
           1)  enter your length of service:      ___
           2)  subtract 10 from your length of service:-10
                                                  ___
           3)  multiply the result by 2:          ___
                                                  +10
           4)  add 10 to the amount listed in 3). ___
           5)  enter this total on line 3a. This is the factor for
your adjusted years of service and tells you approximately the
number of weeks of severance pay you would be entitled to.

line 3a.   Adjusted Years of Service              ____________

line 4.Basic Severance Pay (multiply amount in line 2 by number on
line 3a--Adjusted Years of Service)         =      _________

line 5.Age Adjustment Factor (if your age is above 40, look your
age up on the "AGE TABLE AND FACTORS" chart attached.  Enter the
"factor" number shown.)

           Age = _______years and _______months.  Factor = _______

Line 6.    Severance Pay Amount

           Multiply line 4 by line 5 factor       $_________

           6a.  If line 6 exceeds line 1, enter amount on line 1.
           The amount of severance pay will be    $_________

Line 7.    Buyout Amount

           If line 6a exceeds $25,000, enter $25,000
OR
           If line 6a does not exceed $25,000, but is more than
line 1, enter amount on line 1.

                            YOUR BUYOUT AMOUNT:   $_________ 


[BBS Note-Guide continues on next page.]




                      AGE TABLE AND FACTORS

Yrs.       Factor    Yrs.       Factor    Yrs.        Factor
     Mos.                 Mos.                 Mos.

40   3-5   1.O25     48   4-8   1.850     56   9-11   2.675
40   6-8   1.050     48   9-11  1.875     57   0-2    2.700
40   9-11  1.075     49   0-2   1.900     57   3-5    2.725
41   0-2   1.100     49   3-5   1.925     57   6-8    2.750
41   3-5   1.125     49   6-8   1.950     57   9-ll   2.775
41   6-8   1.150     49   9-ll  1.975     58   0-2    2.800
41   9-ll  1.175     50   0-2   2.000     58   3-5    2.825
42   O-2   1.200     50   3-5   2.025     58   6-8    2.850
42   3-5   1.225     50   6-8   2.050     58   9-ll   2.875
42   6-8   1.250     50   9-11  2.075     59   0-2    2.900
42   9-11  1.275     51   0-2   2.100     59   3-5    2.925
43   0-2   1.300     51   3-5   2.125     59   6-8    2.950
43   3-5   1.325     51   6-8   2.150     59   9-11   2.975
43   6-8   1.350     51   9-ll  2.175     60   0-2    3.000
43   9-11  1.375     52   0-2   2.200     60   3-5    3.025
44   0-2   1.400     52   3-5   2.225     60   6-8    3.050
44   3-5   1.425     52   6-8   2.250     60   9-11   3.075
44   6-8   1.450     52   9-11  2.275     61   0-2    3.100
44   9-11  1.475     53   0-2   2.300     61   3-5    3.125
45   0-2   1.500     53   3-5   2.325     61   6-8    3.150
45   3-5   1.525     53   6-8   2.350     61   9-11   3.175
45   6-8   1.550     53   9-11  2.375     62   0-2    3.200
45   9-11  1.575     54   0-2   2.400     62   3-5    3.225
46   0-2   1.600     54   3-5   2.425     62   6-8    3.250
46   3-5   1.625     54   6-8   2.450     62   9-11   3.275
46   6-8   1.650     54   9-11  2.475     63   0-2    3.300
46   9-11  1.675     55   0-2   2.500     63   3-5    3.325
47   0-2   1.700     55   3-5   2.525     63   6-8    3.350
47   3-5   1.725     55   6-8   2.550     63   9-11   3.375
47   6-8   1.750     55   9-11  2.575     64   0-2    3.400
47   9-11  1.775     56   0-2   2.600     64   3-5    3.425
48   0-2   1.800     56   3-5   2.625     64   6-8    3.450
48   3-5   1.825     56   6-8   2.650     64   9-11   3.475

[BBS Note-End of Guide.]
